Documentation/crypto/devel-algos.rst, before:

Developing Cipher Algorithms
============================

Registering And Unregistering Transformation
--------------------------------------------

There are three distinct types of registration functions in the Crypto
API. One is used to register a generic cryptographic transformation,
while the other two are specific to HASH transformations and
COMPRESSion. We will discuss the latter two in a separate chapter, here
we will only look at the generic ones.

Before discussing the register functions, the data structure to be
filled with each, struct crypto_alg, must be considered -- see below
for a description of this data structure.

The generic registration functions can be found in
include/linux/crypto.h and their definition can be seen below. The
former function registers a single transformation, while the latter
works on an array of transformation descriptions. The latter is useful
when registering transformations in bulk, for example when a driver
implements multiple transformations.

::

       int crypto_register_alg(struct crypto_alg *alg);
       int crypto_register_algs(struct crypto_alg *algs, int count);


The counterparts to those functions are listed below.

::

       int crypto_unregister_alg(struct crypto_alg *alg);
       int crypto_unregister_algs(struct crypto_alg *algs, int count);


Notice that both registration and unregistration functions do return a
value, so make sure to handle errors. A return code of zero implies
success. Any return code < 0 implies an error.

The bulk registration/unregistration functions register/unregister each
transformation in the given array of length count. They handle errors as
follows:

-  crypto_register_algs() succeeds if and only if it successfully
   registers all the given transformations. If an error occurs partway
   through, then it rolls back successful registrations before returning
   the error code. Note that if a driver needs to handle registration
   errors for individual transformations, then it will need to use the
   non-bulk function crypto_register_alg() instead.

-  crypto_unregister_algs() tries to unregister all the given
   transformations, continuing on error. It logs errors and always
   returns zero.

Single-Block Symmetric Ciphers [CIPHER]
---------------------------------------

Example of transformations: aes, arc4, ...

This section describes the simplest of all transformation
implementations, that being the CIPHER type used for symmetric ciphers.
The CIPHER type is used for transformations which operate on exactly one
block at a time and there are no dependencies between blocks at all.

Registration specifics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The registration of [CIPHER] algorithm is specific in that struct
crypto_alg field .cra_type is empty. The .cra_u.cipher has to be
filled in with proper callbacks to implement this transformation.

See struct cipher_alg below.

Cipher Definition With struct cipher_alg
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Struct cipher_alg defines a single block cipher.

Here are schematics of how these functions are called when operated from
other part of the kernel. Note that the .cia_setkey() call might happen
before or after any of these schematics happen, but must not happen
during any of these are in-flight.

::

             KEY ---.    PLAINTEXT ---.
                    v                 v
              .cia_setkey() -> .cia_encrypt()
                                      |
                                      '-----> CIPHERTEXT


Please note that a pattern where .cia_setkey() is called multiple times
is also valid:

::


      KEY1 --.    PLAINTEXT1 --.         KEY2 --.    PLAINTEXT2 --.
             v                 v                v                 v
       .cia_setkey() -> .cia_encrypt() -> .cia_setkey() -> .cia_encrypt()
                               |                                  |
                               '---> CIPHERTEXT1                  '---> CIPHERTEXT2


Multi-Block Ciphers
-------------------

Example of transformations: cbc(aes), ecb(arc4), ...

This section describes the multi-block cipher transformation
implementations. The multi-block ciphers are used for transformations
which operate on scatterlists of data supplied to the transformation
functions. They output the result into a scatterlist of data as well.

Registration Specifics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The registration of multi-block cipher algorithms is one of the most
standard procedures throughout the crypto API.

Note, if a cipher implementation requires a proper alignment of data,
the caller should use the functions of crypto_skcipher_alignmask() to
identify a memory alignment mask. The kernel crypto API is able to
process requests that are unaligned. This implies, however, additional
overhead as the kernel crypto API needs to perform the realignment of
the data which may imply moving of data.

Cipher Definition With struct blkcipher_alg and ablkcipher_alg
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Struct blkcipher_alg defines a synchronous block cipher whereas struct
ablkcipher_alg defines an asynchronous block cipher.

Please refer to the single block cipher description for schematics of
the block cipher usage.

Specifics Of Asynchronous Multi-Block Cipher
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are a couple of specifics to the asynchronous interface.

First of all, some of the drivers will want to use the Generic
ScatterWalk in case the hardware needs to be fed separate chunks of the
scatterlist which contains the plaintext and will contain the
ciphertext. Please refer to the ScatterWalk interface offered by the
Linux kernel scatter / gather list implementation.

Hashing [HASH]
--------------

Example of transformations: crc32, md5, sha1, sha256,...

Registering And Unregistering The Transformation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are multiple ways to register a HASH transformation, depending on
whether the transformation is synchronous [SHASH] or asynchronous
[AHASH] and the amount of HASH transformations we are registering. You
can find the prototypes defined in include/crypto/internal/hash.h:

::

       int crypto_register_ahash(struct ahash_alg *alg);

       int crypto_register_shash(struct shash_alg *alg);
       int crypto_register_shashes(struct shash_alg *algs, int count);


The respective counterparts for unregistering the HASH transformation
are as follows:

::

       int crypto_unregister_ahash(struct ahash_alg *alg);

       int crypto_unregister_shash(struct shash_alg *alg);
       int crypto_unregister_shashes(struct shash_alg *algs, int count);


Cipher Definition With struct shash_alg and ahash_alg
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here are schematics of how these functions are called when operated from
other part of the kernel. Note that the .setkey() call might happen
before or after any of these schematics happen, but must not happen
during any of these are in-flight. Please note that calling .init()
followed immediately by .finish() is also a perfectly valid
transformation.

::

       I)   DATA -----------.
                            v
             .init() -> .update() -> .final()      ! .update() might not be called
                         ^    |         |            at all in this scenario.
                         '----'         '---> HASH

       II)  DATA -----------.-----------.
                            v           v
             .init() -> .update() -> .finup()      ! .update() may not be called
                         ^    |         |            at all in this scenario.
                         '----'         '---> HASH

       III) DATA -----------.
                            v
                        .digest()                  ! The entire process is handled
                            |                        by the .digest() call.
                            '---------------> HASH


Here is a schematic of how the .export()/.import() functions are called
when used from another part of the kernel.

::

       KEY--.                 DATA--.
            v                       v                  ! .update() may not be called
        .setkey() -> .init() -> .update() -> .export()   at all in this scenario.
                                 ^     |         |
                                 '-----'         '--> PARTIAL_HASH

       ----------- other transformations happen here -----------

       PARTIAL_HASH--.   DATA1--.
                     v          v
                 .import -> .update() -> .final()     ! .update() may not be called
                             ^    |         |           at all in this scenario.
                             '----'         '--> HASH1

       PARTIAL_HASH--.   DATA2-.
                     v         v
                 .import -> .finup()
                               |
                               '---------------> HASH2

Note that it is perfectly legal to "abandon" a request object:
- call .init() and then (as many times) .update()
- _not_ call any of .final(), .finup() or .export() at any point in future

In other words implementations should mind the resource allocation and clean-up.
No resources related to request objects should remain allocated after a call
to .init() or .update(), since there might be no chance to free them.


Specifics Of Asynchronous HASH Transformation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some of the drivers will want to use the Generic ScatterWalk in case the
implementation needs to be fed separate chunks of the scatterlist which
contains the input data. The buffer containing the resulting hash will
always be properly aligned to .cra_alignmask so there is no need to
worry about this.

Commit message:

crypto: skcipher - remove the "blkcipher" algorithm type
Now that all "blkcipher" algorithms have been converted to "skcipher",
remove the blkcipher algorithm type.

The skcipher (symmetric key cipher) algorithm type was introduced a few
years ago to replace both blkcipher and ablkcipher (synchronous and
asynchronous block cipher).  The advantages of skcipher include:

  - A much less confusing name, since none of these algorithm types have
    ever actually been for raw block ciphers, but rather for all
    length-preserving encryption modes including block cipher modes of
    operation, stream ciphers, and other length-preserving modes.

  - It unified blkcipher and ablkcipher into a single algorithm type
    which supports both synchronous and asynchronous implementations.
    Note, blkcipher already operated only on scatterlists, so the fact
    that skcipher does too isn't a regression in functionality.

  - Better type safety by using struct skcipher_alg, struct
    crypto_skcipher, etc. instead of crypto_alg, crypto_tfm, etc.

  - It sometimes simplifies the implementations of algorithms.

Also, the blkcipher API was no longer being tested.

Signed-off-by: Eric Biggers <ebiggers@google.com>
Signed-off-by: Herbert Xu <herbert@gondor.apana.org.au>
Signed-off-by: Divyanshu-Modi <divyan.m05@gmail.com>

Documentation/crypto/devel-algos.rst, after:

Developing Cipher Algorithms
============================

Registering And Unregistering Transformation
--------------------------------------------

There are three distinct types of registration functions in the Crypto
API. One is used to register a generic cryptographic transformation,
while the other two are specific to HASH transformations and
COMPRESSion. We will discuss the latter two in a separate chapter, here
we will only look at the generic ones.

Before discussing the register functions, the data structure to be
filled with each, struct crypto_alg, must be considered -- see below
for a description of this data structure.

The generic registration functions can be found in
include/linux/crypto.h and their definition can be seen below. The
former function registers a single transformation, while the latter
works on an array of transformation descriptions. The latter is useful
when registering transformations in bulk, for example when a driver
implements multiple transformations.

::

       int crypto_register_alg(struct crypto_alg *alg);
       int crypto_register_algs(struct crypto_alg *algs, int count);


The counterparts to those functions are listed below.

::

       int crypto_unregister_alg(struct crypto_alg *alg);
       int crypto_unregister_algs(struct crypto_alg *algs, int count);


Notice that both registration and unregistration functions do return a
value, so make sure to handle errors. A return code of zero implies
success. Any return code < 0 implies an error.

The bulk registration/unregistration functions register/unregister each
transformation in the given array of length count. They handle errors as
follows:

-  crypto_register_algs() succeeds if and only if it successfully
   registers all the given transformations. If an error occurs partway
   through, then it rolls back successful registrations before returning
   the error code. Note that if a driver needs to handle registration
   errors for individual transformations, then it will need to use the
   non-bulk function crypto_register_alg() instead.

-  crypto_unregister_algs() tries to unregister all the given
   transformations, continuing on error. It logs errors and always
   returns zero.

Single-Block Symmetric Ciphers [CIPHER]
---------------------------------------

Example of transformations: aes, arc4, ...

This section describes the simplest of all transformation
implementations, that being the CIPHER type used for symmetric ciphers.
The CIPHER type is used for transformations which operate on exactly one
block at a time and there are no dependencies between blocks at all.

Registration specifics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The registration of [CIPHER] algorithm is specific in that struct
crypto_alg field .cra_type is empty. The .cra_u.cipher has to be
filled in with proper callbacks to implement this transformation.

See struct cipher_alg below.

Cipher Definition With struct cipher_alg
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Struct cipher_alg defines a single block cipher.

Here are schematics of how these functions are called when operated from
other part of the kernel. Note that the .cia_setkey() call might happen
before or after any of these schematics happen, but must not happen
during any of these are in-flight.

::

             KEY ---.    PLAINTEXT ---.
                    v                 v
              .cia_setkey() -> .cia_encrypt()
                                      |
                                      '-----> CIPHERTEXT


Please note that a pattern where .cia_setkey() is called multiple times
is also valid:

::


      KEY1 --.    PLAINTEXT1 --.         KEY2 --.    PLAINTEXT2 --.
             v                 v                v                 v
       .cia_setkey() -> .cia_encrypt() -> .cia_setkey() -> .cia_encrypt()
                               |                                  |
                               '---> CIPHERTEXT1                  '---> CIPHERTEXT2


Multi-Block Ciphers
-------------------

Example of transformations: cbc(aes), ecb(arc4), ...

This section describes the multi-block cipher transformation
implementations. The multi-block ciphers are used for transformations
which operate on scatterlists of data supplied to the transformation
functions. They output the result into a scatterlist of data as well.

Registration Specifics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The registration of multi-block cipher algorithms is one of the most
standard procedures throughout the crypto API.

Note, if a cipher implementation requires a proper alignment of data,
the caller should use the functions of crypto_skcipher_alignmask() to
identify a memory alignment mask. The kernel crypto API is able to
process requests that are unaligned. This implies, however, additional
overhead as the kernel crypto API needs to perform the realignment of
the data which may imply moving of data.

Cipher Definition With struct skcipher_alg
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Struct skcipher_alg defines a multi-block cipher, or more generally, a
length-preserving symmetric cipher algorithm.

Scatterlist handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some drivers will want to use the Generic ScatterWalk in case the
hardware needs to be fed separate chunks of the scatterlist which
contains the plaintext and will contain the ciphertext. Please refer
to the ScatterWalk interface offered by the Linux kernel scatter /
gather list implementation.

Hashing [HASH]
--------------

Example of transformations: crc32, md5, sha1, sha256,...

Registering And Unregistering The Transformation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are multiple ways to register a HASH transformation, depending on
whether the transformation is synchronous [SHASH] or asynchronous
[AHASH] and the amount of HASH transformations we are registering. You
can find the prototypes defined in include/crypto/internal/hash.h:

::

       int crypto_register_ahash(struct ahash_alg *alg);

       int crypto_register_shash(struct shash_alg *alg);
       int crypto_register_shashes(struct shash_alg *algs, int count);


The respective counterparts for unregistering the HASH transformation
are as follows:

::

       int crypto_unregister_ahash(struct ahash_alg *alg);

       int crypto_unregister_shash(struct shash_alg *alg);
       int crypto_unregister_shashes(struct shash_alg *algs, int count);


Cipher Definition With struct shash_alg and ahash_alg
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here are schematics of how these functions are called when operated from
other part of the kernel. Note that the .setkey() call might happen
before or after any of these schematics happen, but must not happen
during any of these are in-flight. Please note that calling .init()
followed immediately by .finish() is also a perfectly valid
transformation.

::

       I)   DATA -----------.
                            v
             .init() -> .update() -> .final()      ! .update() might not be called
                         ^    |         |            at all in this scenario.
                         '----'         '---> HASH

       II)  DATA -----------.-----------.
                            v           v
             .init() -> .update() -> .finup()      ! .update() may not be called
                         ^    |         |            at all in this scenario.
                         '----'         '---> HASH

       III) DATA -----------.
                            v
                        .digest()                  ! The entire process is handled
                            |                        by the .digest() call.
                            '---------------> HASH


Here is a schematic of how the .export()/.import() functions are called
when used from another part of the kernel.

::

       KEY--.                 DATA--.
            v                       v                  ! .update() may not be called
        .setkey() -> .init() -> .update() -> .export()   at all in this scenario.
                                 ^     |         |
                                 '-----'         '--> PARTIAL_HASH

       ----------- other transformations happen here -----------

       PARTIAL_HASH--.   DATA1--.
                     v          v
                 .import -> .update() -> .final()     ! .update() may not be called
                             ^    |         |           at all in this scenario.
                             '----'         '--> HASH1

       PARTIAL_HASH--.   DATA2-.
                     v         v
                 .import -> .finup()
                               |
                               '---------------> HASH2

Note that it is perfectly legal to "abandon" a request object:
- call .init() and then (as many times) .update()
- _not_ call any of .final(), .finup() or .export() at any point in future

In other words implementations should mind the resource allocation and clean-up.
No resources related to request objects should remain allocated after a call
to .init() or .update(), since there might be no chance to free them.


Specifics Of Asynchronous HASH Transformation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some of the drivers will want to use the Generic ScatterWalk in case the
implementation needs to be fed separate chunks of the scatterlist which
contains the input data. The buffer containing the resulting hash will
always be properly aligned to .cra_alignmask so there is no need to
worry about this.
